\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename announc.info
@settitle ESS --- Emacs Speaks Statistics
@comment %**end of header
@comment $Id: announc.texi,v 1.3 1999/03/16 18:17:36 rossini Exp $

@node Announce, Introduction, Top, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter ANNOUNCING ESS
@cindex ANNOUNCE


Annoucing the release of ESS-5.1.4 (Emacs Speaks Statistics).
-------------------------------------------------------------

(New: improvements to SAS support,
      Splus 5 support, 
      Splus 4.5 under Microsoft Windows support)

ESS is an Emacs package which provides a standard interface between
statistical programs and statistical processes.  It is intended to
provide assistance for interactive statistical programming and data
analysis, and was is based on and extends the capabilities of S-mode.
The code is freely available but is not in the public domain.  It is
distributed under the GNU GPL.  Please read the file COPYING for more
information about the license.

ESS grew out of the desire to extend S-mode-4.8.  The current set of
developers desired support for:
- XEmacs
- R
- S4
- Microsoft Windows

In addition, with new modes being developed for R, Stata, and SAS, it
was felt a unifying interface and framework for the user interface,
would benefit both the user and the developer, by helping both groups
conform to standard Emacs usage.  The end result is an increase in
efficiency for statistical programming and data analysis, over the
usual tools.

We are grateful to David M. Smith , the previous developer (for S-mode
3.x and 4.x), as well as to the initial developers of S-mode, Doug
Bates, Ed Kademan and Frank Ritter.

And to help remove any further confusion:

	The name is __ESS__.  Not ESS-mode.

Thank you :-).

@node License, New Features, General Information, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section License

@include license.texi

@node New Features, Current Features, License, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section New Features

@include newfeat.texi

@node Current Features, Stability, New Features, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Current Features

@include currfeat.texi

@node Stability, Requirements, Current Features, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Stability

@include stabilty.texi

@node Requirements, Latest Version, Stability, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Requirements

@include requires.texi

@node Latest Version, Installation (from tar file), Requirements, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Getting the Latest Version 

@include getting.texi

@node Reporting Bugs, Mailing Lists, Installation (from anonymous CVS), General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Reporting Bugs

@include bugrept.texi

@node Mailing Lists, Authors, Reporting Bugs, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Mailing Lists

@include mailing.texi

@node Authors,  , Mailing Lists, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Authors

@include authors.texi

@bye
@c Remember to delete these lines before creating the info file.
@iftex
@lucidbook
@bindingoffset = 0.5in
@parindent = 0pt
@end iftex

@comment Local Variables:
@comment TeX-master: "announc.texi"
@comment End:
