@itemize @bullet
@item
Commands like @code{ess-display-help-on-object} and list completion
cannot be used while the user is entering a multi-line command.  The
only real fix in this situation is to use another ESS process.

@item
The @code{ess-eval-} commands can leave point in the ESS process
buffer in the wrong place when point is at the same position as the last
process output.  This proves difficult to fix, in general, as we need to
consider all @emph{windows} with @code{window-point} at the right place.

@item
It's possible to clear the modification flag (say, by saving the buffer)
with the edit buffer not having been loaded into S.

@item
Backup files can sometimes be left behind, even when
@code{ess-keep-dump-files} is @code{nil}.

@item
Passing an incomplete @Sl{} expression to @code{ess-execute} causes ESS
to hang.

@item
The function-based commands don't always work as expected on functions
whose body is not a parenthesized or compound expression, and don't even
recognize anonymous functions (i.e. functions not assigned to any
variable).

@item
Multi-line commands could be handled better by the command history
mechanism.

@item Changes to the continutation prompt in R (e.g. 
@code{options(continue = "    ")}) are not automatically detected by ESS.
Hence, for now, the best thing is not to change the continuation prompt.
If you do change the continuation prompt, you will need to change
accordingly the value of @code{inferior-ess-secondary-prompt} in
@code{R-customize-alist}.

@end itemize
