
The SVN repository has been retired.  All ESS development is now carried
out with git and github.

@c There no longer is an anonymous CVS repository for ESS, due to lack of
@c interest, little demand, and problems with security.

@c text below modified from R-admin.texi (thanks to Kurt for the tip).

@c The latest development version of ESS is available via
@c @uref{https://svn.R-project.org/ESS/}, the ESS Subversion repository.  If
@c you have a Subversion client (see @uref{http://subversion.tigris.org/}),
@c you can download the sources using:
@c @smallexample
@c % svn checkout https://svn.r-project.org/ESS/trunk @var{path}
@c @end smallexample
@c @noindent
@c which will put the ESS files into directory @var{path}.  Later,
@c within that directory, `svn update' will bring that directory up to
@c date.  Windows-based tools such as TortoiseSVN are also available for
@c downloading the files.  Alternatively, you can browse the sources with a
@c web browser at: @uref{https://svn.r-project.org/ESS/trunk, ESS SVN
@c site}.  However, please use a subversion client instead to minimize the
@c load when retrieving.

@c If you remove other versions of ESS from your emacs load-path, you can
@c then use the development version by adding the following to .emacs:

@c @example
@c (load "/path/to/ess-svn/lisp/ess-site.el") 
@c @end example

@c Note that https is required, and that the SSL certificate for the
@c Subversion server of the R project is

@c @smallexample
@c Certificate information:
@c  - General name: r-project.org
@c  - Serial number: 04:9D:4F:0D:53:03:DB
@c  - Valid: from  03/10/2014  to  03/10/2016
@c  - Issuer: Starfield Secure Certificate Authority - G2
@c            http://certs.starfieldtech.com/repository/
@c  - SHA1-Fingerprint: F5:15:96:DB:F1:2F:35:1B:96:06:C3:A4:2A:E2:80:78:76:4C:A4:30
@c  - MD5-Fingerprint: D8:7D:4F:8F:ED:92:65:EE:EE:A5:73:2D:BB:F6:35:E6
@c @end smallexample

@c @noindent
@c The above *is* trusted.  The R-Project paid for it.

