@include requires.texi

There are two main methods used for installing ESS. You may install from
a third-party repository or from source code. Once you install it, you
must also activate or load ESS in each Emacs session, though
installation from a third-party repository likely takes care of that for
you. See @ref{Activating and Loading ESS} for more details.

@menu
* Installing from a third-party repository::
* Installing from source::
* Activating and Loading ESS::
* Check Installation::
@end menu

@node Installing from a third-party repository, Installing from source
@section Installing from a third-party repository

ESS is packaged by many third party repositories. Many GNU/Linux
distributions package it, usually with the name ``emacs-ess'' or
similar.

ESS is also available through Milkypostman’s Emacs Lisp Package Archive
(MELPA), a popular repository for Emacs packages. Instructions on how to
do so are found on @uref{https://melpa.org/, MELPA's website}. MELPA
also hosts MELPA-stable with stable ESS builds. You may choose between
MELPA with the latest and greatest features (and bugs) or MELPA-stable,
which may lag a bit behind but should be more stable.

After installing, users should make sure ESS is activated or loaded in
each Emacs session. See @ref{Activating and Loading ESS}. Depending on
install method, this may be taken care of automatically.

@node Installing from source, Activating and Loading ESS, Installing from a third-party repository
@section Installing from source

Stable versions of ESS are available at the
@uref{https://ess.r-project.org, ESS web page} as a .tgz file or .zip
file. ESS releases are GPG-signed, you should check the signature by
downloading the accompanying @code{.sig} file and doing:

@example
gpg --verify ess-18.10.tgz.sig
@end example

Alternatively, you may download the git repository. ESS is currently
hosted on GitHub: @uref{https://github.com/emacs-ess/ESS}. @code{git
clone https://github.com/emacs-ess/ESS.git} will download it to a new
directory @code{ESS} in the current working directory.

We will refer to the location of the ESS source files as
@file{/path/to/ESS/} hereafter.

After installing, users should make sure they activate or load ESS in
each Emacs session, see @ref{Activating and Loading ESS}

Optionally, compile elisp files, build the documentation, and the
autoloads:
@example
cd /path/to/ESS/
make
@end example
Without this step the documentation, reference card, and autoloads
will not be available. Uncompiled ESS will also run slower.

Optionally, you may make ESS available to all users of a machine by
installing it site-wide. To do so, run @code{make install}. You might
need administrative privileges:

@example
make install
@end example

The files are installed into @code{/usr/share/emacs} directory. For this step to
run correctly on macOS, you will need to adjust the @file{PREFIX}
path in @file{Makeconf}. The necessary code and instructions are
commented in that file.

@node Activating and Loading ESS, Check Installation, Installing from source
@section Activating and Loading ESS

After installing ESS, you must activate or load it each Emacs session.
ESS can be autoloaded, and if you used a third-party repository (such as
your Linux distribution or MELPA) to install, you can likely skip this
section and proceed directly to @ref{Check Installation}

Otherwise, you may need to add the path to ESS to @code{load-path} with:

@example
(add-to-list 'load-path "/path/to/ESS/lisp")
@end example

You then need to decide whether to take advantage of deferred loading
(which will result in a faster Emacs startup time) or require ESS when
Emacs is loaded. To autoload ESS when needed (note that if installed
from source, you must have run @code{make}):

@example
(load "ess-autoloads")
@end example

To require ESS on startup, you can either put

@example
(require 'ess-site)
@end example

or

@example
(require 'ess-r-mode)
@end example

In your configuration file, depending on whether you want all ESS
features or only R related features.

@node Check Installation,  , Activating and Loading ESS
@section Check Installation
Restart Emacs and check that ESS was loaded from a correct
location with @code{M-x ess-version}.

