@comment @itemize @w{}
@comment @item

Changes and New Features in 16.10:
@itemize @bullet

@item @ESS{[R]}: Syntax highlighting is now more consistent. Backquoted
names are not fontified as strings (since they really are identifiers).
Furthermore they are now correctly recognised when they are function
definitions or function calls.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Backquoted names and @code{%op%} operators are
recognised as sexp. This is useful for code navigation, e.g. with
@kbd{C-M-f} and @kbd{C-M-b}.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Integration of outline mode with roxygen examples fields.
You can use outline mode's code folding commands to fold the examples
field. This is especially nice to use with well documented packages with
long examples set. Set @code{ess-roxy-fold-examples} to non-nil to
automatically fold the examples field when you open a buffer.
@item @ESS{[R]}: New experimental feature: syntax highlighting in
roxygen examples fields. This is turned off by default. Set
@code{ess-roxy-fontify-examples} to non-nil to try it out.
@item @ESS{[R]}: New package development command @code{ess-r-devtools-ask}
bound to @kbd{C-c C-w C-a}. It asks with completion for any devtools
command that takes @code{pkg} as argument.
@item @ESS{[R]}: New command @kbd{C-c C-e C-r} to reload the inferior process. 
Currently only implemented for R. The R method runs @code{inferior-ess-r-reload-hook}
on reloading.
@item @ESS{[R]}: @code{ess-r-package-mode} is now activated in non-file buffers as well.
@end itemize

Bug fixes in 16.10:
@itemize @bullet
@item @ESS{[R]}: Fix broken (un)flagging for debugging inside packages
@item @ESS{[R]}: Fixes (and improvements) in Package development
@item @ESS{[R]}: Completion no longer produces @code{...=} inside @code{list(  )}.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Better debugging and tracing in packages.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Better detection of symbols at point.
@item @ESS{[R]}: No more spurious warnings on deletion of temporary files.
@item @ESS{[julia]}: help and completion work (better)
@item @ESS{[julia]}: available via @code{ess-remote}
@end itemize

Changes and New Features in 16.04:
@itemize @bullet

@item @ESS{[R]}: @code{developer} functionality has been refactored.
The new user interface consists of a single command
@code{ess-r-set-evaluation-env} bound by default to @kbd{C-c C-t
C-s}. Once an evaluation environment has been set with, all subsequent
ESS evaluation will source the code into that environment. By default,
for file within R packages the evaluation environment is set to the
package environment. Set @code{ess-r-package-auto-set-evaluation-env} to
@code{nil} to disable this.
@item @ESS{[R]}: New @code{ess-r-package-mode}
This development mode provides features to make package development
easier. Currently, most of the commands are based on the @code{devtools}
packages and are accessible with @kbd{C-c C-w} prefix. See the
documentation of @code{ess-r-package-mode} function for all available
commands. With @kbd{C-u} prefix each command asks for extra arguments to
the underlying devtools function. This mode is automatically enabled in
all files within R packages and is indicated with @code{[pkg:NAME]} in
the mode-line.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Help lookup has been improved.
It is now possible to get help for namespaced objects such as
pkg::foobar. Furthermore, ESS recognizes more reliably when you change
@code{options('html_type')}.
@item @ESS{[R]}: New specialized breakpoints for debugging magrittr pipes
@item @ESS{}: ESS now implements a simple message passing interface
to communicate between ESS and inferior process.
@end itemize

Bug fixes in 16.04:
@itemize @bullet
@item @ESS{[R]}: Roxygen blocks with backtics are now correctly filled
@item @ESS{[R]}: Don't skip breakpoints in magrittr's @code{debug_pipe}
@item @ESS{[R]}: Error highlighting now understands `testthat` type errors
@item @ESS{[Julia]}: Added getwd and setwd generic commands
@end itemize


Changes and New Features in 15.09:
@itemize @bullet

@item @ESS{[R]}: The indentation logic has been refactored.
It should be faster, more consistent and more flexible. There are three
types of indentation settings, those starting with @code{ess-offset-}
give the actual offsets, those starting with @code{ess-indent-} are
control (commonly Boolean) variables, and those starting with
@code{ess-align-} are vertical alignment overrides which inhibit default
offsets in specific situations. See @code{ess-style-alist} for detailed
description of the new indentation system and provided default
indentation styles.

@item @ESS{[R]}: Deprecation of old indentation settings.
As a consequence of the indentation re-factoring
@code{ess-brace-imaginary-offset}, @code{ess-expression-offset} and all
delimiter-specific offsets are deprecated. The settings for indentation
of continued statements have been replaced by
@code{ess-offset-continuations}. It can be set to either @code{cascade}
or @code{straight} (the default). @code{ess-arg-function-offset} has
been replaced by @code{ess-indent-from-lhs} and has been generalised to
assignments. This setting now works with both statement blocks and
expressions and only takes effect for offsets set to @code{prev-call}
and @code{open-delim} in order to produce a consistent indentation.

@item @ESS{}: A test framework has been set up.

@item @ESS{[R]}: A new RStudio style is provided to mimic as closely
as possible R files indented via RStudio. To reproduce the setup of some
of the RStudio users, the RStudio- style with
@code{ess-offset-arguments} set to @code{prev-line} is also provided. In
addition, the new RRR+ style is equivalent to RRR except it indents
blocks in function calls relatively to the opening delimiter. This style
does not try to save horizontal space and produces more indentation.

@item @ESS{[R]}: Roxygen fields will now be indented on paragraph
refilling in order to make the documentation more readable. You can also
refill commented lines in the @code{examples} field without squashing
the surrounding code in the comments.

@item @ESS{[R]}: ESS can now format your code! This is controlled
through the settings @code{ess-fill-calls} and
@code{ess-fill-continuations}. When activated, @code{(fill-paragraph)}
formats your calls and your formulas/continuations while making sure
they don't go past @code{fill-column}. Repeated refills cycle through
different styles (see the docstrings for more details). By default, the
refilled region blinks. Set @code{ess-blink-filling} to nil to prevent
this.

@item @ESS{[R]}: Fix occasional missing error location fontification
in inferior buffers.

@item @ESS{[R]}: ess-developer now correctly assigned the environment
of new functions to the package namespace.


@item @ESS{[Julia]}: ?[topic] now works in the *julia* buffer.
Note that support for editing Julia code now depends on
@file{julia-mode.el} from the Julia project.  If you install ESS from
the official tarball/zip file, @file{julia-mode.el} is already included.
Otherwise, if you install ESS by
running @code{make}, then the latest version of @file{julia-mode.el} is
downloaded (and so you need an active internet connection to install)
during the installation process.  Alternatively, if you run ESS without
running @code{make}, then ensure that you have the @code{julia-mode.el},
which you can get easily from MELPA for example.


@item @iESS{}: For naming inferior processes, ESS can use @code{projectile}'s
project root and it does so when @code{ess-gen-proc-buffer-name-function} is
set to @code{ess-gen-proc-buffer-name:projectile-or-simple} as by default,
or to another value beginning with @code{ess-gen-proc-buffer-name:projectile-*}.

@end itemize


Changes and New Features in 15.03-1:
@itemize @bullet
@item @ESS{[R]}: An indentation bug has been fixed (github issue 163)
@item @ESS{[R]}: On windows, if `ess-prefer-higher-bit' is non-nil (the
default), then R-newest will try to run a 64 bit (rather than 32 bit)
version of R.
@end itemize

Changes and New Features in 15.03:
@itemize @bullet
@item @ESS{[R]}: Full native support for `company-mode`.
@item @ESS{[R]}: More efficient caching algorithm for R completion.
@item @ESS{}: New offset variable `ess-close-paren-offset` to control
the indentation of the closing parentheses.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Ask for CRAN mirror only once per emacs session.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Detect @code{library} and @code{require} calls
for better completion caching.
@item Buffer display is now customizable (@code{ess-show-buffer-action}).
@item Use @code{y-or-n-p} instead of @code{yes-or-no-p} throughout.
@item More support for ODS in ess-sas-graph-view.
@item Makefiles are now both UNIX and GNU friendly.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Simplify directory lookup in @code{ess-developer} (#137).
@item Make closed paren indentation consistent
@end itemize

Bug Fixes in 15.03:
@itemize @bullet
@item Fix open brace indentation bug (#27 in ess/R-ESS-bugs.R).
@item Fix git version lookup
@item Don't check directory modtime in R dialect.
@item Declare all ess macros for edebug.
@item Add @code{ess-smart-comma} to eldoc message functions.
@item Inform users when retrieving RDA aliases.
@item Line ending in '~' is also a continuation line.
@item Filing roxy paragraphs works as expected now.
@item In @code{ess-developer-add-package}, remove incorrect `wait`
argument from @code{ess-get-words-from-vector} call.
@item Fix #96, #117, #120, #125, #134, #137.
@item Fix ess-quit-r. Call base::q() even if it is masked.
@item Fix `ess-show-buffer` to always display the buffer in another window.
@item Makefile: Fix cd bug for directories with spaces in them
@item @code{ess-kill-buffer-and-go} modified to not restart R
@end itemize

Changes / Selected Bug Fixes in 14.09:
@itemize @bullet
@item @ESS{[Julia]}: Executable is changed to @code{julia}.
@item @ESS{[Julia]}: Completion and help system was adjusted to Julia
v.0.3.0. Julia v.0.2.x is no more supported.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Running R with @code{gdb} debugger now works as expected
@item @iESS{}: Inferior ESS buffers are now derived from @code{comint-mode}
@item @ESS{[R]}: @code{ess-execute-screen-options} uses correct screen
width in terminal sessions
@item @ESS{}: @code{ess-build-tags-for-directory} works when no TAGS file
name was provided
@item @ESS{}: @code{ess-offset-statement-continued} is now respected everywhere
except inside of the @code{if} test condition.
@item @ESS{}: New variable @code{ess-offset-statement-first-continued} for
indentation of the first line in multiline statements.
@item @ESS{R}: Starting @kbd{,} in multiline statements indentation is now
ignored to achieve a more pleasant alignment.
@item @ESS{R}: Improved behavior of @kbd{RET} in roxygen blocks.
@item @ESS{[R]}: command cleaning with @kbd{C-u C-u C-y} was broken with
lines containing " + "
@item @ESS{[R]}: fixed "empty watch window bug"
@item @ESS{[R]}: don't ask for help location on ac-quick-help (request of github #81)
@item @ESS{[R]}: "importClassesFrom" and "importMethodsFrom" were added to
the list of two-parameter roxygen commands
@item @ESS{[R]}: fix vignetes display and hyperlinks (were broken in 13.09-1)
@item @ESS{[Julia]}: recognize function names ending with !
@item @ESS{[Julia]}: fix indentation of "for" comprehension syntax within brackets.
@end itemize

Changes / Selected Bug Fixes in 13.09-1:
@itemize @bullet
@item ess-remote and TRAMP: R support code is now downloaded in binary form instead
of being injected from local machine. The R code is stored in
@code{~/.config/ESSR/} directory on the remote machine
@item TRAMP: PAGER environment variable is now correctly set to @code{inferior-ess-pager}
@item retrieval of help topics on remote machines is fixed
@item org-babel: source references of R code executed from org files correctly point
to source references in original org files (version 8.2.1 or higher of
org-mode is required for this feature)
@item @code{ess-execute} is now bound to @kbd{C-c C-e C-e} in @code{ess-extra-map}.
@item completion works again in @code{ess-execute}
@item @ESS{[R]}: @code{head} and @code{tail} methods were replaced by @code{htsummary} in
@code{ess-R-describe-object-at-point-commands}
@item @ESS{[roxygen]}: evaluation commands now work in roxygen blocks.
Leading comments are automatically removed before the evaluation
@item @ESS{[transcript]}: 'Clean Region' now works with multiline statements;
 @code{ess-transcript-clean-region} etc. correctly treat
 multiline statements, i.e., no longer forgets the lines typically
 preceded by '+'
@item @ESS{[SAS]}: Three features/fixes with special thanks to Matthew Fidler
@uref{https://github.com/emacs-ess/ESS/pulls/mlf176f2,
https://github.com/emacs-ess/ESS/pulls/mlf176f2}. Turn on SAS log mode
when appropriate.  Indent comments and CARDS statement more appropriately.
@item @ESS{[SAS]}: @code{ess-sas-edit-keys-toggle} default returns to @code{nil}
@item @ESS{[R]}: support for @code{prettify-symbols-mode}:
contribution from Rudiger Sonderfeld @uref{https://github.com/emacs-ess/ESS/pull/65}
@item @ESS{[SWV]}: knitr now evaluates in the current frame
@item @ESS{[developer]}: ess-developer doesn't kill open DESCRIPTION files anymore
@item @ESS{[roxygen]}: @code{ess-roxy-preview-HTML} is now on @kbd{C-c C-o C-w} and
 @code{ess-roxy-preview-text} is now on @code{C-c C-o C-t}
@item @ESS{}: installation with @code{make install} was simplified and should work
out of the box on most *nix systems
@item @ESS{} installation instructions simplified
@item fixed font-lock bug introduced in 13.09 that was causing very slow process output
@end itemize

Changes/New Features in 13.09:
@itemize @bullet
@item font-lock in process buffers doesn't "spill" over prompts.
Missing closing string delimiters should not cause wrong fontification
of the following command input.
@item @ESS{[julia]}: full features M-TAB completion and auto-complete support,
which now works for modules, structures and data types.
@item @ESS{[julia]}: a much better eldoc showing arguments of
methods and data type constructors
@item ESS-developer:
  @itemize @minus
  @item ESS-developer work-flow pattern has been streamlined:
  ESS-developer is now automatically activated on per-file basis if the
  file is part of a developed package @code{ess-developer-packages}. The
  old behavior (activation on per-process basis) is still available on
  @code{M-x ess-developer} in a process buffer.
  @item integration with @code{devtools} package. New command
  @code{ess-developer-load-package} calls @code{load_all} on the package
  containing current file. @code{ess-developer-add-package} now offers IDO
  menu completions with available loading methods, currently
  @code{library}, and @code{load_all}. Loading command can be customized
  with @code{ess-developer-load-on-add-commands}.
  @end itemize
@item @kbd{TAB} now indents region if region is active
(a contribution of Matthew Fidler in pull #41)
@item @code{M-x ess-version} now reports full loading path
and recognizes git and ELPA versions.
@item warning and error keyword are now highlighted with
@code{font-lock-warning-face} as they should be, (for quite some time
these keywords have been hijacked by compilation mode fontification).
@item eldoc: Eldoc now recognizes multiple processes.
If current process is busy, or current buffer is not associated with a
process, eldoc picks its completions from the first available free
process.
@item org-babel: evaluation is now org-friendly
@item help: new help buffers now try to reuse ess-help buffers.
This behavior is controlled by @code{ess-help-reuse-window} custom
variable.
@item help: ?foo pops IDO menu on multiple help files
(so far it worked only for @kbd{C-c C-v})
@item remote evaluation is considerably faster now on slow connections
@item @ESS{[R]} tracebug R source references regular expressions
are (mostly) language agnostic.
@item @code{ess-function-call-face} inherits from
@code{font-lock-function-name-face} rather than @code{font-lock-builtin-face}.
@item @code{ess-inject-source} now accepts @code{function-and-buffer} option.
@item Documentation: The ``New Features''
section (and @file{NEWS}) now represent recent changes: within the last
year or so.  All changes can be found in the new @uref{news.html,
news.html} (or @file{NEWS} and @file{ONEWS}).
@item @ESS{[R]} @code{ess-rep-regexp} should no longer inf.loop (rarely!),
and hence @code{M-x ess-fix-miscellaneous} should neither.
@end itemize

Changes/New Features in 13.05:
@itemize @bullet
@item @ESS{[gretl]}: Support for @code{gretl} (both editing and
sub-process interaction). A contribution of Ahmadou Dicko.
@item @ESS{}: process output display is 4-10 times faster due to new caching
and only occasional emacs re-display (for the moment this functionality
is available only when @code{ess-tracebug} is active).
@item @ESS{}: @kbd{C-c `} is now bound to @code{ess-show-traceback} and
@kbd{C-c ~} is bound to @code{ess-show-call-stack}.
@item @ESS{[R]}: ESS stores function in 'ESSR' environment to
avoid kludging users' global environment and accidental deletion.
@item @ESS{[R]}: new variable @code{ess-swv-processing-command} to control
weaving and tangling.
@item @ESS{[R]}: @code{ess-default-style} has been changed
 (from @code{DEFAULT}) to @code{RRR}.  Use something like
 @code{(setq ess-default-style 'DEFAULT)} or
 @code{(setq ess-indent-level 2)} in your @file{~/.emacs} equivalent
 @emph{before} loading ESS, if you do not like this new ``incompatible''
 default style.
@item @ESS{[julia]}: ESS stores its functions in 'ESS' module.
@item @ESS{[julia]}: Eldoc is now supported in julia modes
@item @ESS{[julia]}: Adjusted error reference detection and interactive help
to julia internal changes
@item @ESS{[R]}: @code{ess-use-tracebug}'s default has been changed to
 @code{t}. Set it to nil if you want to keep the previous behavior.
@item @ESS{[tracebug]}: Electric debug keys have been removed [breaking change]
The functionality was replaced with @code{ess-debug-minor-mode} and
@code{ess-debug-minor-mode-map}.
@item @ESS{[tracebug]}: @code{ess-tracebug-map} is an alias to
 @code{ess-dev-map} @kbd{C-c C-t}.
@item @ESS{[tracebug]}: @code{ess-bp-toggle-state} (@kbd{C-c C-t o})
 can now be used during the debug session to toggle breakpoints on the fly
 (suggestion by Ross Boylan).
@item @ESS{[tracebug]}: @code{ess-debug-flag-for-debugging} and
@code{ess-debug-unflag-for-debugging} work correctly from the debugging
 contexts. These commands also recognize non-exported functions for the
 packages listed in @code{ess-developer-packages} (@kbd{C-c C-t C-a}).

@item @ESS{[R]}: Eldoc (activated by @code{ess-use-eldoc}) has
 become more sophisticated, and hence also more intruding in the interface
 between the Statistics softare, e.g., @R{}, and the user.

 Note that you can turn off ElDoc, by placing @code{(setq ess-use-eldoc nil)}
 in your @file{~/.emacs} file, prior to loading ESS,

@item @ESS{[SAS]}: long over-looked @code{SAS-mode-hook} appears!
@item @ESS{[SAS]}: @code{ess-sas-edit-keys-toggle} now defaults to @code{t}
since @code{sas-indent-line} is still broken, i.e. @kbd{TAB} is now
bound to @code{ess-sas-tab-to-tab-stop} by default
@end itemize


Changes/Bug Fixes in 12.09-2:
@itemize @bullet
@item @ESS{}: new @code{ess-switch-to-end-of-proc-buffer} variable that controls
 whether @kbd{C-c C-z} switches to the end of process buffer. The
 default is @code{t}. You can use prefix argument to @kbd{C-c C-z} to
 toggle this variable.
@item @ESS{}: fix in @code{ess-eval-linewise} that was causing emacs
to hang during R debugging with @code{ess-eval-visibly} equal to
@code{t}.
@item @ESS{}: fix in @code{ess-eval-linewise} that was causing emacs to recenter
the prompt in visible window
@item @ESS{[tracebug]}: A better handling of ``Selection'' prompts
and debug related singlekey commands.
@item @ESS{}: fix a bug in @code{ess-switch-process} that was causing
@code{*new*} selection to fail.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Solve missing @code{ess-local-process-name} bug in R-dired.
@item @ESS{[SWV]}: @code{ess-swv-PDF} doesn't ask for a command to run if
there is only one command in @code{ess-swv-pdflatex-commands}.
@item @ESS{[SWV]}: @code{ess-swv-weave} gained an universal argument to
allow for an interactive choice between available weavers (sweave,
knitr).
@item @ESS{}: @code{ess-eval-*-and-step} functions go to next empty
line at eob, instead of staying at the last line.
@end itemize


Changes/New Features in 12.09-1:
@itemize @bullet
@item @ESS{} @emph{Breaking Changes in Keys}:

@itemize @minus
@item New keymaps:
@code{ess-doc-map} bound to @kbd{C-c C-d}; @code{ess-extra-map} bound
to @kbd{C-c C-e}; @code{ess-dump-object-into-edit-buffer} was moved on
@kbd{C-c C-e C-d}
@item roxygen map was moved on @kbd{C-c C-o} and
@kbd{ess-roxy-update-entry} now resides on @kbd{C-c C-o C-o}
@item ess-handy-commands is not bound anymore
@item @code{ess-dev-map} (including @code{ess-tracebug} and @code{ess-developer})
moved on @kbd{C-c C-t}
@item @code{C-c C-y} is deprecated in favor of @code{C-c C-z C-z}
@end itemize
@item @ESS{[R]} new command @code{ess-describe-object-at-point}
bound to @kbd{C-c C-d C-e} (repeat @kbd{C-e} or @kbd{e} to cycle). It
was inspired by Erik Iverson's @code{ess-R-object-tooltip}. Customize
@code{ess-describe-at-point-method} to use tooltip instead of an
electric buffer.
@item @ESS{}: New command @code{ess-build-tags-for-directory}
bound to @kbd{C-c C-e C-t} for building dialect specific tag
tables. After building tags use @kbd{M-.} to navigate to
function and objects definitions. By default @kbd{C-c C-e C-t} builds
tags based on imenu regular expressions and also include other common
languages @code{.c, .o, .cpp} etc. But it relies on external @code{find}
and @code{etags} commands. If @code{ess-build-tags-command} is defined
(for @code{R}), the inferior process is asked to build tags instead.
@item @ESS{}: @code{ess-switch-process} offers @code{*new*} alternative
to start a new process instead of switching to one of the currently
running processes.
@item @ESS{}: Switching between processes (@kbd{C-c C-s}) uses buffer names instead
of the internal process names. Use @code{M-x rename-buffer} command to
conveniently rename your process buffers.
@item @ESS{}: Process buffers can be automatically named on process creation
according to user specified scheme. Default schemes are *proc*,
*proc:dir* and *proc:abbr-long-dir* where @code{proc} stands for the
internal process name and @code{dir} stands for the directory where the
process was started in. The default is *proc*. For customization see
@code{ess-gen-proc-buffer-name-function}.
@item @ESS{}: @code{ess-eval-visibly-p} is deprecated in favor of @code{ess-eval-visibly}.
@item @ESS{}: New evaluation pattern @code{nowait}.
In addition to old @code{nil} and @code{t} values,
@code{ess-eval-visibly} accepts @code{nowait} for a visible evaluation
with no waiting for the process. See @code{ess-eval-visibly} for details
on evaluation patterns.
@item @ESS{}: New ``Process'' menu entry with process related commands and configuration
@item @iESS{}: Process buffer is now automatically shown on errors
@item @ESS{}: New @code{ess-switch-to-inferior-or-script-buffer} command bound to @kbd{C-c C-z}
in both script and process buffers. If invoked form process buffer it
switches to the most recent buffer of the same dialect. It is a single
key command.
@item @ESS{R-help}:  On multiple help pages with the same name, @kbd{C-c C-v}
now asks for user resolution directly in emacs.
@item @ESS{[R]} ess-roxy: new variable @code{ess-roxy-re} for fontification
of cases where the number of leading @kbd{#} differs from
@code{ess-roxy-str}.
@item @ESS{[R]} Eldoc was considerably enhanced.
It now finds hidden default S3 methods and displays non-default methods'
arguments after trailing ||.
@item @ESS{[R]}: New @code{ess-display-demos} command bound to @kbd{C-c C-d o} and @kbd{C-c C-d C-o}
@item @ESS{}: New @code{ess-help-web-search} command bound to @kbd{C-c C-d w} and @kbd{C-c C-d C-w}
to facilitate interactive search of web resources. Implemented for @code{R},
@code{Stata} and @code{Julia}. See also @code{ess-help-web-search-command}.
@item @ESS{}: ess-pdf-viewer-pref accepts now command line arguments
@item @ESS{[Rnw]}: Add knitr support.
Customize @code{ess-swv-processor} for the default processor.
@item @ESS{[Rnw]}: More thorough renaming of remaining
@code{noweb-*} to @code{ess-noweb-*}.
@item @ESS{[Rnw]} new commands @code{ess-eval-chunk-and-step} and @code{ess-eval-chunk}
bound to @kbd{M-n C-c} and @kbd{M-n C-M-x} to mirror standard ess
commands in C-c map.
@item @ESS{[R]} Auto-completion: new variable
@code{ess-ac-R-argument-suffix} to customize the insertion of trailing
"=". Defaults to `` = ``.
@item @ESS{[Julia]}: Added index, apropos and web-search to julia.
@item @ESS{} help: More evaluation commands were added to ess-help mode (@kbd{C-c C-c}, @kbd{C-M-x} etc)
@end itemize

Bug Fixes in 12.09-1:
@itemize @bullet
@item @iESS{help}: Multiple help pages with the same name are properly handled on @kbd{C-c C-v}
@item @iESS{remote}: Evaluation with ESS remote no longer freezes emacs.
@item @iESS{}: @code{comint-previous-prompt} @kbd{C-c C-p} no longer stops on secondary prompt ``+''.
@item @iESS{[R]}, @iESS{(Sqpe) [S]} on Windows:
The @code{options("editor")} is now initialized to @code{emacsclient}
instead of the previous @code{gnuclient}.  The user may need to add the
line @code{(server-start)} to the emacs initialization
file. @code{emacsclient} has been included with emacs since GNU Emacs
22.1.
@item @ESS{[Rnw]} Fixed ``connection to R'' bug (in 12.09 only).
@item @ESS{[Rnw]} Explicit @code{ess-swv-stangle} and @code{ess-swv-sweave}
functions.
@item @ESS{[Rnw]} Fixed completion and smart underscore problems cause by unmatched ``\'''
@item @ESS{[R]} is more careful with the @code{R} code injection.
It now happens only once at the start of the session.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Fixed auto-scrolling the comint buffer on evaluation.
@item @ESS{[Julia]}: Solve several indentation and word navigation problems.
@item @ESS{[Julia]}: Help system works again.
@end itemize

Changes/New Features in 12.09:

@itemize @bullet
@item @b{Due to XEmacs lacking some features that ESS requires, ESS support of XEmacs
ends with ESS 12.04-4.  This decision will be re-visited in the future as
XEmacs continues to sync with GNU Emacs.}

@item @ESS{[R]}: On Windows, there is now a new customizable variable
(currently called @code{ess-directory-containing-R}) to tell ESS where
to look for the @file{Rterm.exe} executables.  The name of the variable
and the values it can take are both in beta and subject to change.  Prior
to this variable, ESS searched only in the default installation
directory.  Setting this variable now tells ESS how to find
@file{Rterm.exe} executables when they are installed somewhere else.

@item @ESS{[julia]}: @emph{new} mode
for editing julia code (@file{*.jl}). Start with @code{M-x julia}.

Full interaction interface, imenu and basic error referencing are available.


@item @ESS{[R]} noweb: @code{noweb-mode} and @code{noweb-font-lock-mode} have
been renamed to @code{ess-noweb-mode} and
@code{ess-noweb-font-lock-mode} to avoid conflicts with the ``real'' @code{noweb-mode}.

@item @ESS{[R]} noweb: The long standing font-lock bug has been solved
in @code{ess-noweb} interface.


@item @ESS{}: Basic evaluation keys are now bound to @code{ess-eval-region-*-} functions:

@itemize @minus
@item @kbd{C-M-x} is bound to @code{ess-eval-region-or-function-or-paragraph}
@item @kbd{C-c C-c} is bound to @code{ess-eval-region-or-function-or-paragraph-and-step}
@item @kbd{C-RET} is bound to @code{ess-eval-region-or-line-and-step}
@end itemize

Each of these functions first evaluates the region whenever the region
is active.

@item @ESS{}: @kbd{C-M-a}/@kbd{C-M-e} now step to beginning/end of
paragraph if no function has been detected.

@item @ESS{}: @code{ess-eval-*-and-step} family of functions are now smarter,
and don't step to end of buffer or end of chunk code (@code{@@}) when at
the end of the code.

@item @ESS{}: @code{ess-handy-commands} function is bound to @kbd{C-c h}

@item @ESS{}: ESS is now @emph{blinking}  the evaluated region.
Set @code{ess-blink-region} to nil to deactivate; @code{ess-blink-delay}
gives the duration of the blink. Evaluated region is ``blinked'' in
@code{highlight} face.

@item @ESS{[R-help]}  New key @kbd{a} for ``apropos()'' in help buffers. Also available
through @kbd{C-c h}.

@item @ESS{[R-help]}  All R commands of type foo?bar and foo??bar are recognized
and redirected into appropriate *ESS-help* buffers.

@item @ESS{[R]}: New customization interface for @emph{font-lock}.

ESS font-lock operates with predefined keywords. Default keywords are
listed in @code{ess-R-font-lock-keywords} and
@code{inferior-R-font-lock-keywords}, which see. The user can easily
customize those by adding new keywords. These variables can also be
interactively accessed and saved through @kbd{ESS/Font-lock} submenu.

Several new fontification keywords have been added. Most notably the
keywords for highlighting of function calls, numbers and operators.

@item @ESS{[R]}: auto-complete is now activated by default whenever
auto-complete package is detected. Set @code{ess-use-auto-complete} to
nil to deactivate.
@item @ESS{[R]}: R AC sources are no longer auto-starting at 0 characters
but at the default @code{ac-auto-start} characters.
@item @ESS{} no longer redefines default ac-sources,
but only appends @code{ac-source-filename} to it.
@item @ESS{}: @code{ac-source-R} now concatenates `` = `` to function arguments.

@item @ESS{}: Menus for ESS and iESS have been reorganized and enriched with
@emph{Tracebug} and @emph{Developer} submenus.

@item @ESS{[R]}: @code{ess-developer} and @code{ess-tracebug} commands are available by default
in @code{ess-dev-map} which is bound to @kbd{C-c d} in ESS and iESS maps.

@item @ESS{[R]}: @code{eldoc} truncates long lines whenever @code{eldoc-echo-area-use-multiline-p}
is non-nil (the default). Set this variable to t if you insist on multiline eldoc.
See also @code{ess-eldoc-abbreviation-style}.

@item @ESS{[R]}: completion code pre-caches arguments
of heavy generics such as @code{plot} and @code{print} to eliminated the
undesirable delay on first request.

@item @iESS{}: Prompts in inferior buffers are now highlighted uniformly with
@code{comint-highlight-prompt} face.

@item @ESS{[R]}: R process no longer wait for the completion of input in inferior buffer.
Thus, long running commands like @code{Sys.sleep(5)} no longer stall emacs.

@item @ESS{}: [R, S, Stata, Julia] have specialized @code{ess-X-post-run-hook}s, which
are run at the end of subprocess initialization.

@item @ESS{[Stata]}: All interactive evaluation commands work as expected.
On-line comments are removed before the evaluation and multiline
comments are skipped on @kbd{C-c C-c} and other interactive commands.

@item @ESS{} no longer auto-connects to a subprocess with a different dialect than
the current buffer's one.

@item @ESS{}: @code{ess-arg-function-offset-new-line} is now a list for all
the ESS indentation styles, which results in the following indentation
after an open ``('':

@verbatim
  a <- some.function(other.function(
     arg1,
     arg2)
@end verbatim

@item @ESS{[SAS]}: Improved MS RTF support for GNU Emacs; try
  @code{ess-sas-rtf-portrait} and @code{ess-sas-rtf-landscape}.
@end itemize

Changes/Bug Fixes in 12.04-3:
@itemize @bullet
@item @ESS{}: basic support for package.el compatibility
@item @ESS{[R]}: correct indentation of & and | continuation lines
@item @code{M-x ess-version} shows the svn revision even after @code{make install}
@item @ESS{[SAS]}: improved XEmacs support
@item @iESS{[R]}: better finding of previous prompt
@item @ESS{[Stata]}: adjusted prompt for mata mode
@item @ESS{[R]}: resolved name clashes with cl.el
@item @ESS{[R]}: removed dependence on obsolete package assoc
@item New @code{make} target  @code{lisp}, to build the lisp-only part, i.e., not building the docs.
@end itemize

Changes/New Features in 12.04-1:
@itemize @bullet
@item @iESS{[Stata]}: New interactive help invocation.
@item @iESS{[Stata]}: New custom variable @code{inferior-STA-start-file}.
@item @iESS{[Stata]}: @code{inferior-STA-program-name} is now ``stata''
and can be  customized.
@item @ESS{[Stata]} New sections in stata help files
Syntax(@kbd{s-S}), Remarks(@kbd{r}), Title(@kbd{t}).
@end itemize

Bug Fixes in 12.04-1:
@itemize @bullet
@item @ESS{[R]}: Better @code{ess-tracebug} error handling.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Corrected @code{ess-eldoc} help string filtering
and improved argument caching.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Indentation of non-block if/else/for/while lines fixed.
@item @code{M-x ess-version} should work better.
@item @ESS{}: Filename completion now again works inside strings.
@item @iESS{[Stata]}: Fixed prompt detection issue.
@item @ESS{[Rd]}: R is autostarted also from here, when needed.
@end itemize

Changes/New Features in 12.04:
@itemize @bullet
@item @ESS{}: Reverting new behavior of 12.03, @kbd{TAB} in @code{ess-mode}
no longer completes by default.  If you want smart @kbd{TAB} completion
in R and S scripts, similarly to @iESS{} behavior, set the variable
@code{ess-tab-complete-in-script} to @code{t}. Also see
@code{ess-first-tab-never-complete} for how to customize where first
@kbd{TAB} is allowed to complete.
@item @ESS{}: completion is consistently bound to @kbd{M-TAB} (aka @kbd{M-C-i})
in both Emacs23 and Emacs24.
@item @ESS{}: The variable @code{ess-arg-function-offset-new-line}
introduced in @ESS{(12.03)} now accepts a list with the first element a
number to indicate that the offset should be computed from the indent of
the previous line. For example setting it to '(2) results in:

@verbatim
  a <- some.function(
    arg1,
    arg2)
@end verbatim


@end itemize

Changes/New Features in 12.03:
@itemize @bullet
@item @ESS{} indentation: new offset variable @code{ess-arg-function-offset-new-line}
controlling for the indentation of lines immediately following open
'('. This is useful to shift backwards function arguments after a long
function call expression:

@verbatim
  a <- some.function(
         arg1,
         arg2)
@end verbatim


instead of the old

@verbatim
  a <- some.function(
                     arg1,
                     arg2)
@end verbatim

If '(' is not followed by new line the behavior is unchanged:

@verbatim
  a <- some.function(arg1,
                     arg2)
@end verbatim

This variable should be set as part of indentation style lists, or in
ess-mode hook.
@item @ESS{[R]}: @kbd{C-c .} sets (indentation) style.
@item @ESS{}: In ESS buffers @code{yank}(@kbd{C-y}) command accepts
 double argument @kbd{C-u C-u} to paste commands only. It deletes any
lines not beginning with a prompt, and then removes the prompt from
those lines that remain. Useful to paste code from emails,
documentation, inferior ESS buffers or transcript files.
@item Documentation: ESS user manual has been rearranged and
completed with several new chapters and sections to reflect newly added
features (``Completion'', ``Developing with ESS'', ``ESS tracebug'',
``ESS developer'', ``ESS ElDoc'', ``IDO Completion'' and ``Evaluating
Code'')
@item RefCard: Reference card was updated to include new features.
@item Eldoc: Eldoc was rewritten and is activated by default.
See @code{ess-use-eldoc}, @code{ess-eldoc-show-on-symbol},
@code{ess-eldoc-abbreviation-style} variables for how to change the default
behavior. @emph{Note:} @code{skeleton-pair-insert-maybe} prohibits eldoc
display, on @kbd{(} insertion.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Eldoc shows arguments of a generic function whenever found.
@item @ESS{}: @kbd{TAB} in @code{ess-mode} now indents and completes,
if there is nothing to indent. Set
@code{ess-first-tab-never-completes-p} to @code{t} to make @kbd{TAB}
never complete on first invocation. Completion mechanism is similar to
the completion in the @code{inferior-ess-mode} -- a filename expansion
is tried, if not found ESS completes the symbol by querying the
process.
@item @ESS{} for emacs version 24 or higher: ESS is  fully compatible with
the emacs 24 completion scheme, i.e. all the completion is done by
@code{completion-at-point}. Also in accordance with emacs conventions,
ESS doesn't bind @kbd{M-TAB} for emacs 24 or higher. @kbd{M-TAB} calls the
default @code{complete-symbol}.

@item @ESS{[R]}: Out of the box integration with @code{Auto
Completion} mode @uref{http://cx4a.org/software/auto-complete,http://cx4a.org/software/auto-complete} . Three AC
sources @code{ac-source-R-args}, @code{ac-source-R-objects} and
@code{ac-source-R} are provided. The last one combines the previous two
and makes them play nicely together. Set @code{ess-use-auto-complete} to
@code{t} to start using it.  Refer to documentation string of
@code{ac-use-auto-complete} for further information.
@item @ESS{[R]}: New unified and fast argument completion system,
comprised of @code{ess-funname.start}, @code{ess-function-arguments},
@code{ess-get-object-at-point}. Eldoc and auto-completion integration
are using this system.
@item @ESS{}: @code{ess-switch-to-end-of-ESS}(@kbd{C-c C-z}),
and @code{ess-switch-to-ESS}(@kbd{C-c C-y}): Automatically start the
process whenever needed.
@item @ESS{[R]}: @code{roxy} knows about previewing text version of the
documentation. Bound to @kbd{C-c C-e t}.
@item @ESS{[R]}: Solved the ``nil filename'' bug in roxygen support.
@item @ESS{[R]}: @code{ess-tracebug} is now part of @ESS{}:

New Features:

@itemize @minus
@item Source injection: Tracebug now can inject source references on the
fly during code evaluation, i.e. you don't have to source your file, but
just evaluate your code in normal fashion. Variable
@code{ess-tracebug-inject-source-p} controls this behavior - if t,
always inject source reference, if @code{'function}, inject only for
functions (this is the default), if @code{nil}, never inject.

During the source injection the value of @code{ess-eval-visibly} is
ignored.
@item Org-mode support: Visual debugger is now aware of the
temporary org source editing buffer (@kbd{C-c '}) and jumps through this
buffers if still alive, or in original org buffer otherwise.
@item New keys in watch mode: @kbd{?} and @kbd{d}
@item Two new hooks: ess-tracebug-enter-hook and ess-tracebug-exit-hook
@end itemize

@item @ESS{[R]}: New package @code{ess-developer} to evaluate @code{R}
code directly in the package environment and namespace. It can be
toggled on and off with @kbd{C-c d t}. When @code{ess-developer} is on
all ESS evaluation commands are redefined to evaluate code in
appropriate environments. Add package names to the list of your
development packages with @kbd{C-d a}, and remove with @kbd{C-d
r}. Source the current file with @kbd{C-d s}.Evaluation function which
depend on @code{`ess-eval-region'} ask for the package to source the
code into, @code{ess-eval-function} and alternatives search for the
function name in the development packages' environment and namespace and
insert the definition accordingly. See the documentation section
``Developing with ESS/ESS developer'' for more details.

@item @ESS{[R]} help system:

New Features:

@itemize @minus
@item @kbd{q} quits window instead of calling @code{ess-switch-to-end-of-ESS}.
This is consistent with emacs behavior help and other special buffers (@emph{breaking change}).
@item @kbd{k} kills window without asking for the name (pointed by Sam Steingold)
@item Help map inherits from @code{special-mode-map} as sugested by Sam Steingold.
@item Package index: new function @code{ess-display-index} bound to
@kbd{i} in help mode map.
@item Package vignettes: new function @code{ess-display-vignettes} bound to
@kbd{v} in help mode map.
@item Display help in HTML browser: new function @code{ess-display-help-in-browser} bound to
@kbd{w} in help mode map. It depends on @code{R}'s @code{browser}
option.
@item New custom variable @code{ess-help-pop-to-buffer}: if non-nil
@ESS{} help buffers are given focus on display. The default is
@code{t} (@emph{breaking change}).
@item New menu entries for the above functions.
@item Bogus help buffers are no longer generated by default, i.e.
buffers of the form ``No documentation for 'foo' in specified packages and libraries:
you could try '??foo' ''.  @code{ess-help-kill-bogus-buffers} now defaults to
@code{t}.  Beware, there may be instances where the default is unsatisfactory
such as debugging and/or during R development.  Thanks to Ross Boylan for
making the suggestion, Sam Steingold for reminding us of this variable and
Martin Maechler for the warning.
@end itemize
@item @ESS{} now uses @code{IDO} completing read functionality
for all the interactive requests. It uses ido completion
mechanism whenever available, and falls back on classical
completing-read otherwise. You can set @code{ess-use-ido} to nil if you
don't want the IDO completion. See the documentation string of
@code{ess-use-ido} for more information about @code{IDO} and @ESS{}
configuration.

@item @ESS{[S]}: ``@kbd{,}`` is bound to ess-smart-comma:
If comma is invoked at the process marker of an ESS inferior
buffer, request and execute a command from @code{`ess-handy-commands'}
list. If @code{ess-R-smart-operators} is t @code{`ess-smart-comma}
also inserts `` `` after comma.
@item @ESS{[S]}, notably @code{R}: Variable @code{`ess-handy-commands'}
stores an alist of useful commands which are called by @code{ess-smart-comma} in
the inferior buffer.

Currently containing:

@table @asis
@item change-directory
    @code{ess-change-directory}
@item help-index
          @code{ess-display-index}
@item help-object
         @code{ess-display-help-on-object}
@item vignettes
           @code{ess-display-vignettes}
@item objects[ls]
         @code{ess-execute-objects}
@item search
              @code{ess-execute-search}
@item set-width
           @code{ess-execute-screen-options}
@item install.packages
    @code{ess-install.packages}
@item library
             @code{ess-library}
@item setRepos
            @code{ess-setRepositories}
@item sos
                 @code{ess-sos}
@end table

Handy commands: @code{ess-library}, @code{ess-install.packages}, etc -
ask for item with completion and execute the correspond
command. @code{ess-sos} is a interface to @code{findFn} function in
package @code{sos}. If package @code{sos} is not found, ask user for
interactive install.

@item @ESS{}: New dynamic mode line indicator: Process status is automatically
reflected in all mode-lines of associated with the process
buffers. Particularly useful for displaying debug status of
@code{ess-tracebug} and developer status of @code{ess-developer} in all
associated buffers.

@item @ESS{}: New @code{ess-completing-read} mechanism: @ESS{} uses
@code{ido} completions whenever possible. Variable @code{ess-use-ido}
controls whether to use ido completion or not. Active by default.

@item @ESS{} now supports comint fields for output and input
detection. This feature is not used by default, but might be useful in
the future.

@item @ESS{[S]}: New custom variable @code{inferior-ess-S-prompt} to
customize prompt detection regular expression in the inferior ESS
buffers. You can customize this variable to enhance comint navigation
(@code{comint-previous-prompt} and @code{comint-next-prompt}) the
inferior buffers.

@item @ESS{[R]}: Internal @code{R} completion retrieval
(@code{ess-R-complete-object-name})  was rewritten and is faster now.

@item @ESS{} is using process plist to store process specific variables,
as opposed to buffer local variables as it was using before. The use of
buffer local variables to store process variables is discouraged.

@item @ESS{}: new functions to manipulate process plists:
@code{ess-process-get} and @code{ess-process-set}.

@item @ESS{}: Internal process waiting mechanism was completely rewritten. ESS
no more relies on prompt regular expressions for the prompt
detection. The only requirement on the primary process prompt is to end
in @code{> }. This could be overwritten by setting
@code{inferor-ess-primary-prompt}.

@item @ESS{[S]}, notably @code{R}: Saved command history:
 @var{ess-history-file} now accepts @code{t} (default), @code{nil}, or a
 file name. By setting it to @code{nil} no command line history is saved
 anymore.  @var{ess-history-directory} now allows to have the history
 all saved in one ``central'' file.
@item @ESS{[R]}: more Roxygen improvements.
@item @ESS{[R]}: @kbd{C-c .} to set (indentation) style.

@item @ESS{[R]}: Functions with non-standard names (for example 'aaa-bbb:cc') are
properly handled by font-lock and evaluation routines.
@item @ESS{[R]}:Several regexp bugs (described in etc/R-ESS-bugs.el) were
fixed in @code{ess-get-words-from-vector} and @code{ess-command}.
@end itemize

@comment @end itemize
