Changes and New Features in 19.04 (unreleased). See @xref{Old NEWS,,,
ess} for older ESS news:
@itemize @bullet

@item ESS[R]: There is a new menu entry for reloading the R process.
It is otherwise bound to @code{C-c C-e C-r}. Reloading now reuses the
same process name and start arguments that were used to start the
process.

@item iESS: Process runners now return the inferior buffer.
Note that callers of inferior runners should not assume that the current
buffer has been set to the inferior buffer. Instead, use
@code{with-current-buffer} with the return value of the inferior.

@item iESS[SAS]: The SAS keymap was only set in iESS buffers
called `*SAS*`. This is now fixed.

@item ESS[R]: Fixed longstanding indentation issues involving
@code{::} and @code{:::} operators.

@item Implement a more reliable check for the process busy state.
Background actions such as completion and directory synchronization
should not block the process and should not cause printing of the
extraneous output to the interpreter.

@item Activate @code{goto-address-mode} for url and email highlighting in inferior buffers.

@item @code{smart-underscore} and @code{ess-smart-S-assign-key} have been removed.
Users who liked the previous behavior (i.e. underscore inserting ``<-'')
should bind @code{ess-insert-assign} to the underscore in their Emacs
initialization file. For example, @code{(define-key ess-r-mode-map "_"
#'ess-insert-assign)} and @code{(define-key inferior-ess-r-mode-map "_"
#'ess-insert-assign)} will activate it in all ESS R buffers.

@item ESS major modes are now defined using 'define-derived-mode'.
This makes ESS major modes respect modern conventions such as having
<language>-mode-hook and <language>-mode-map. Users are encouraged to
place customizations under the appropriate mode.

@item New option ess-auto-width controls setting the width option on window changes.
Users can change it to 'frame, 'window, or an integer. See the
docstring for details. @code{ess-auto-width-visible} controls
visibility.

@item ESS now respects @code{display-buffer-alist}.
Users can now use @code{display-buffer-alist} to manage how and where
windows appear. See @xref{Controlling buffer display,,, ess} for more
information and examples.

@item @code{ess-roxy-mode} can now be enabled in non-R buffers.
This is primarily intended to support roxygen documentation for cpp
buffers. Preview functionality is not supported outside R buffers.

@item ESS[R]: DESCRIPTION files now open in @code{conf-colon-mode}.

@item @code{ess-style} now has effects when set as a file or directory local variable.

@item @code{ess-default-style} is now obsolete, use @code{ess-style} instead.

@item Options for 'ess-gen-proc-buffer-name-function' have been renamed.
ess-gen-proc-buffer-name:projectile-or-simple was renamed to
ess-gen-proc-buffer-name:project-or-simple and
ess-gen-proc-buffer-name:projectile-or-directory was renamed to
ess-gen-proc-buffer-name:project-or-directory. As the name suggests,
these now rely on project.el (included with Emacs) rather than
projectile.el, which is a third-party package.

@item ESS[R]: devtools commands ask about saving modified buffers before running.
Users can disable the questioning with @code{ess-save-silently}.

@item ESS[R] help pages now provide links to other help topics.
This is similar with what you would see with, for example
@code{options(help_type = ``html'')} but works with the plain-text
version as well. This only works with @code{options(useFancyQuotes =
TRUE)} (the default).

@item @code{ess-rdired} buffers now derive from tabulated-list-mode.
They should look better and be a bit faster overall. The size column
now displays object sizes in bytes.

@item @code{ess-rdired} buffers now auto-update.
The frequency is governed by the new option
@code{ess-rdired-auto-update-interval}.

@item ESS[R]: @code{electric-layout-mode} is now supported.
This automatically inserts a newline after an opening curly brace in R
buffers. To enable it, customize @code{ess-r-mode-hook}.

@item ESS[R]: imenu now supports assignment with the equals sign.

@item ESS[Rd]: Rd no longer writes abbrevs to user's abbrev file.

@item ESS removed support for many unused languages.
This includes old versions of S+, ARC, OMG, VST, and XLS.

@end itemize

The following have been made obsolete or removed, see their
documentation for more detail:

@itemize @bullet

@item Libraries for literate data analysis are obsolete and not loaded by default.
This includes @code{ess-noweb}, @code{ess-swv}, and related
functionality like @code{Rnw-mode}. Users are encouraged to switch to
one of several other packages that deal with these modes. For example,
polymode @url{https://github.com/polymode/poly-R/},
@url{https://polymode.github.io/}, or markdown-mode with edit-indirect
@url{https://jblevins.org/projects/markdown-mode}.

@item Support for @code{auto-complete} is obsolete.
The @code{auto-complete} package is unmaintained and so ESS support is
now obsolete. Users are encouraged to switch to @code{company-mode}
instead.

@item User options for controlling display of buffers.
This includes @code{ess-show-buffer-action},
@code{inferior-ess-same-window}, @code{inferior-ess-own-frame}, and
@code{inferior-ess-frame-alist}. See above about ESS respecting
@code{display-buffer-alist}.

@item Variables @code{ess-tab-always-indent} and @code{ess-tab-complete-in-script}.
Use the Emacs-wide setting of @code{tab-always-indent} instead.

@item @code{inferior-ess-*-start-file} variables.
All modes except Stata did not respect customization of this variable.
In order to load a file on startup, you should put a function on
@code{ess-*-post-run-hook}.

@end itemize
