\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename readme.info
@settitle ESS --- Emacs Speaks Statistics
@comment %**end of header
@comment $Id: readme.texi,v 1.14 2000/06/30 21:17:44 rossini Exp $

@node General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter General Information: README
@cindex README

($Revision: 1.14 $, for ESS 5.1.x)

This is the README file for the distribution of ESS version 5.1.14, the
alpha/beta series we are using on the way to producing 5.2 (the next
stable distribution).  ESS is an Emacs-Lisp interface for interactive
statistical programming and data analysis.  Languages supported include:
S dialects (S 3/4, S-PLUS 3.x, and R), LispStat dialects (XLispStat,
ViSta), and SAS.  Stata and SPSS dialect (SPSS, PSPP) support is being
examined for possible future implementation (a preliminary Stata mode is
distributed).

ESS grew out of the desire for bug fixes and extensions to S-mode-4.8.
In particular, XEmacs support as well as extensions to incorporate R
were desired.  In addition, with new modes being developed for R,
Stata, and SAS, it was felt that providing for a unifying framework
would eliminate differences in the user interface, as well as to
provide for faster development of production tools and statistical
analysis.  5.1.y has, for its guts, the basic framework from S-mode.
However, it has been cleaned, streamlined, brought closer to
conformance as a standard GNU Emacs package, and redesigned for
modularity and reuse.

The current development team is led by A.J. (Tony) Rossini
(@email{rossini@@biostat.washington.edu}), who did the initial port to
XEmacs and has been the primary coder.  Martin Maechler
(@email{maechler@@stat.math.ethz.ch}) and Kurt Hornik
(@email{hornik@@ci.tuwien.ac.at}) have assisted with S-PLUS, S4, R, and
XLispStat sub-modes, and Richard M. Heiberger
(@email{rmh@@fisher.stat.temple.edu}) has done much of the work for
implementing the SAS sub-mode, as well as assisted with S-PLUS (under MS
Windows and remote access) and S4 development.  Douglas Bates
(@email{bates@@stat.wisc.edu}) contributed the initial S4 mode, as well
as provided disk space, ftp and http access to the source for
development purposes.

We are grateful to David M. Smith, the previous developer (for S-mode
3.x and 4.x), as well as to the initial developers of S-mode, Doug
Bates, Ed Kademan and Frank Ritter.

In addition, some of the code has been and will be borrowed from Tom
Cook (from his excellent SAS mode) and Thomas Lumley (preliminary
Stata mode), gratefully (from us) and with permission (from them).

The name is @b{ESS}.  Not ESS-mode.

@menu
* License::
* New Features::
* Current Features::
* Stability::
* Requirements::
* Latest Version::
* Installation (from tar file)::
* Installation (from anonymous CVS)::
* Reporting Bugs::
* Mailing Lists::
* Authors::
@end menu

@node License, New Features, General Information, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section License

@include license.texi

@node New Features, Current Features, License, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section New Features

@include newfeat.texi

@node Current Features, Stability, New Features, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Current Features

@include currfeat.texi

@node Stability, Requirements, Current Features, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Stability

@include stabilty.texi

@node Requirements, Latest Version, Stability, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Requirements

@include requires.texi

@node Latest Version, Installation (from tar file), Requirements, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Getting the Latest Version

@include getting.texi

@node Installation (from tar file), Installation (from anonymous CVS), Latest Version, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Installation (from tar file)

@include inst_tar.texi

@node Installation (from anonymous CVS), Reporting Bugs, Installation (from tar file), General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Installation (from anonymous CVS)

@include inst_cvs.texi

@node Reporting Bugs, Mailing Lists, Installation (from anonymous CVS), General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Reporting Bugs

@include bugrept.texi

@node Mailing Lists, Authors, Reporting Bugs, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Mailing Lists

@include mailing.texi

@node Authors,  , Mailing Lists, General Information
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Authors

@include authors.texi

@bye
@c Remember to delete these lines before creating the info file.
@iftex
@lucidbook
@bindingoffset = 0.5in
@parindent = 0pt
@end iftex

@comment Local Variables:
@comment TeX-master: "readme.texi"
@comment End:
