ESS is most likely to work with current/recent versions of the following
statistical packages: R/S-PLUS, SAS, Stata, OpenBUGS and JAGS.

ESS supports current, and recent, stable versions of GNU Emacs
(specifically, the 22.x and 23.x series; alpha/beta/pre-release versions
are NOT SUPPORTED).  XEmacs currently does not allow all ESS
features. Basic ESS functionality however is supported for the time being
(XEmacs stable 21.4.14 or higher).

To build the PDF documentation, you will need a version of TeX Live or
texinfo that includes texi2dvi (BEWARE: recent TeX Live, and some
texinfo RPMs, do NOT include texi2dvi).

@c ESS has been tested with

@c @itemize @bullet
@c @item R >=0.49
@c @item S-PLUS 3.3-4, 4.5, 2000, 5.0-1, 6.0-2, 7.0, 8.0
@c @item S4
@c @item SAS >=9.1
@c @item BUGS 0.5, 0.6
@c @item JAGS 1.0
@c @item Stata >=10.0 (command line only)
@c @c is anyone still using this? @item XLispStat >=3.50
@c @end itemize

@c on the following platforms

@c @itemize @bullet
@c @item Linux/x86 (all but BUGS)
@c @item Solaris/x86 (all but BUGS and S-PLUS)
@c @c cannot confirm this right now @item SGI (all)
@c @item MS Windows 98/NT/2000/XP (R, S-PLUS, SAS interactive only, and BUGS)
@c @item Apple Mac OS X 10.4-5 (R, JAGS, Stata)
@c @end itemize

@c with the following versions of emacs

@c @itemize @bullet
@c @item GNU Emacs 20.3-7, 21.1, 21.3-4, 22.1
@c @item XEmacs 21.4.0-8, 21.4.9-13@footnote{
@c require the files.el patch to revert-buffer for the Local Variables
@c updating problem}, 21.4.14-15, 21.4.17-22 (betas not supported, but 21.5.23+ may work)
@c @c @item GNU Emacs <20.3 and XEmacs <21.0@footnote{These releases of emacs are no
@c @c longer supported, so an upgrade is recommended if you plan to use ESS.
@c @c If you have GNU Emacs 19.29, see @xref{Unix installation}.  Also, note
@c @c that the `custom' library bundled with Emacs 19.34 is too _old_, its API is
@c @c incompatible with the `new custom' bundled with recent Emacsen.
@c @c The `new custom' for Emacs 19.34 is available for download
@c @c @uref{ftp://ftp.dina.kvl.dk/pub/Staff/Per.Abrahamsen/custom/custom-1.9962.tar.gz, here}.}
@c @end itemize
